docs: finalize Snapcraft 9 release notes (#6220)
snapcore/snapcraft: docs/release-notes/snapcraft-9-0.rst

installed software.

What's new
----------

Snapcraft 9.0 brings the following features, integrations, and improvements.

Stable support for core26
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Core26 snaps can now be built without ``build-base: devel`` or ``grade: devel``. As a
result, they are eligible for publication to candidate and stable channels in the Snap
Store.

> The :ref:`Change from core24 to core26 <how-to-change-from-core24-to-core26>` guide

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The :ref:`how-to-change-from-core24-to-core26` guide
```

This was already the page's name

describes the steps for migrating an existing Snapcraft project to core26.

GPU extension
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The new :ref:`reference-gpu-extension` has been added for core22 and higher snaps,
which provides hardware-accelerated graphics support for applications that need OpenGL,

> Vulkan, and other GPU capabilities.

Reviewer: WDYT of something like this to signal to desktop snap developers what its purpose is? This is maybe a little too wordy in one sentence but I couldn't come up with a good word flow with two sentences.

```suggestion
GPU extension
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The new :ref:`reference-gpu-extension` has been added for core22 and higher snaps,
which provides hardware-accelerated graphics support for applications that need OpenGL,
Vulkan, and other GPU capabilities without full desktop support from extensions such as
the GNOME extension.
```

Author: Good idea.  I broke it up into two sections with that added context.

GPU linter
~~~~~~~~~~

A new linter has been added for snaps that need GPU support.
If a snap includes GPU libraries, the linter suggests using a GPU content snap.

> :ref:`Use the GPU linter <how-to-use-the-gpu-linter>` describes how to address issues

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:ref:`how-to-use-the-gpu-linter` describes how to address issues
```

Same reasoning as above

installed software.

What's new
----------

Snapcraft 9.0 brings the following features, integrations, and improvements.

Stable support for core26

> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Support for core26
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

Since the past note clearly stated "experimental", this should be a clear enough signal.

Author: https://github.com/canonical/snapcraft/pull/6220/commits/39eb0b4c02a3d8bb58b0dccc4e02620c55ae9b34

> Core26 snaps can now be built without ``build-base: devel`` or ``grade: devel``. As a

Reviewer 2: For something as first-class as a new core and major version bump, I'd like users to view this as a fresh slate. We shouldn't assume that they are familiar with the details of experimental or stopgap changes.

I would start with a statement that core26 itself is stable and is recommended for new snaps. Then, in the second para, the call to action for those who are migrating for the first time. The final paragraph should be the ancillary calls-to-action for past testers.

Author: https://github.com/canonical/snapcraft/pull/6220/commits/39eb0b4c02a3d8bb58b0dccc4e02620c55ae9b34

Reviewer 2: This is great!

result, they are eligible for publication to candidate and stable channels in the Snap
Store.

The :ref:`how-to-change-from-core24-to-core26` guide describes the steps for migrating

> an existing Snapcraft project to core26.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If your snap uses core24 and you'd like to migrate, see
:ref:`how-to-change-from-core24-to-core26`.
```

I'm going against my recent guideline here. WCAG actually recommends not to start sentences with them. Sorry for the shift.

Author: https://github.com/canonical/snapcraft/pull/6220/commits/39eb0b4c02a3d8bb58b0dccc4e02620c55ae9b34

What's the guidance exactly? Not starting with a link to another page?

Reviewer 2: It's buried in [this concept doc](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/link-purpose-in-context.html):

> This context will be most usable if it precedes the link. (For instance, if you must use ambiguous link text, it is better to put it at the end of the sentence that describes its destination, rather than putting the ambiguous phrase at the beginning of the sentence.) If the description follows the link, there can be confusion and difficulty for screen reader users who are reading through the page in order (top to bottom).

I'll find a way to weave it into the guide.

GPU extension
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Previously, snaps had to use a desktop extension, such as the GNOME extension, to

> get GPU support even when they didn't need full desktop support. This increased the

Reviewer 2: Giving this fresh eyes for the first time in a while:

> get GPU support

I don't like the idea that snaps "get support" for things. I view support for things as a binary that Snapcraft furnishes to the user – Snapcraft does or doesn't support Rust, Snapcraft does or doesn't support Common Lisp. Snaps can have _access to_, or _provide_, features, resources, and so on. Maybe "access GPU libraries" or "capabilities" like you stated later?

Author: Capabilities is a great word here, especially since the extension does more than just providing libraries.  I reworded this whole section in https://github.com/canonical/snapcraft/pull/6220#discussion_r3184833174

complexity and build time of snaps.

> The new :ref:`reference-gpu-extension` has been added for core22 and higher snaps,

Reviewer 2: Nit:

```suggestion
A :ref:`reference-gpu-extension` has been added for core22 and higher snaps,
```

"The new GPU extension" → there was an extension before, and now there's a new one.

Similar to "A new linter has been added" later in these notes.

Author: https://github.com/canonical/snapcraft/pull/6220/commits/39eb0b4c02a3d8bb58b0dccc4e02620c55ae9b34

> which provides hardware-accelerated graphics support for applications that need OpenGL,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
which provides hardware-accelerated graphics support for apps that need OpenGL,
```

Author: https://github.com/canonical/snapcraft/pull/6220/commits/39eb0b4c02a3d8bb58b0dccc4e02620c55ae9b34

> Vulkan, and other GPU capabilities. Snaps that only need GPU support can use this

Reviewer 2: > GPU capabilities

Do you think users will be led to think that snaps are isolated from the GPU?

"GPU-specific capabilities"? "GPU APIs"?

Author: I don't know - what do you think of this rewording?  I want express that snaps always had access to the GPU, but the new extension makes it significantly easier to do that.

```
Snaps already support hardware-accelerated graphics like OpenGL and Vulkan,
but accessing it usually means relying on a full desktop extension.
This increases the complexity and build time of snaps.

The new :ref:`reference-gpu-extension` has been added for core22 and higher snaps,
which provides hardware-accelerated graphics support for apps. 
If your snap used a desktop extension like GNOME as
a workaround for GPU capabilities, replace it with this new extension.
```

Author: I put this text my follow up commit, so you can give feedback directly.

Reviewer 2: I think this is quite good now. :)

> extension instead of a desktop extension.

Reviewer 2: The last sentence would be more impactful as a CTA if it read "If your snap used a desktop extension like GNOME as a workaround for GPU libraries, replace it with this new extension."

Author: https://github.com/canonical/snapcraft/pull/6220/commits/39eb0b4c02a3d8bb58b0dccc4e02620c55ae9b34

GPU linter
~~~~~~~~~~

> A new linter has been added for snaps that need GPU support.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A new linter has been added for snaps that need GPU libraries.
```

Author: https://github.com/canonical/snapcraft/pull/6220/commits/39eb0b4c02a3d8bb58b0dccc4e02620c55ae9b34

I did a little more rewording here

> If a snap includes GPU libraries, the linter suggests using a GPU content snap.

Reviewer 2: Between GPU libraries, the new GPU extension, and snaps (in some places called a "provider snap", here called "content"), it might be best to specify that this only applies to specific files detected in combination with the GNOME/KDE extension.

Author: It will lint regardless of the extension. For example, this would give a lint warning to use the GPU content snap:

```yaml
parts:
  my-only-part:
    plugin: nil
    stage-packages: [mesa-vulkan-drivers]
```

Should I make it more clear that "_If a snap includes GPU libraries_" is refering to stage-packages?

Reviewer 2: I think so, yes.

Author: Reworded.

The :ref:`how-to-use-the-gpu-linter` guide describes how to address issues flagged by
the linter.

Stable .NET extensions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The :ref:`reference-dotnet-extensions` are now stable and no longer require

> using the ``SNAPCRAFT_ENABLE_EXPERIMENTAL_EXTENSIONS`` environment variable.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the ``SNAPCRAFT_ENABLE_EXPERIMENTAL_EXTENSIONS`` environment variable.
```

Bazel plugin
~~~~~~~~~~~~

> The new :ref:`craft_parts_bazel_plugin` has been added for building Bazel applications.

Reviewer 2: Nit:

```suggestion
The :ref:`craft_parts_bazel_plugin` is now available for parts that need the Bazel build system.
```

``npm-use`` plugin

> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
npm Use plugin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

Author: Why don't we do "NPM Use plugin"?

I looked at Rockcraft and it seems inconsistent:

<img width="1000" height="920" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/bfb237ca-af91-4593-ace9-c81a334c1238" />

Reviewer 2: The project always spells it "npm", even in titles. "npm Use" would be consistent with their own docs: https://docs.npmjs.com/policies/npm-license

This puts us in a bind for sentence-initial wording, so I'd be OK with "Npm" in those cases. But for naming, I think it's too much of a departure from what users might recognise in an official product.

Reviewer 2: Fixing this:

- https://github.com/canonical/rockcraft/pull/1203
- https://github.com/canonical/craft-parts/pull/1565

I'll propose a workaround for this in the next sync.

Author: Thanks!

The new :ref:`craft_parts_npm_use_plugin` has been added. This plugin builds npm

> applications from local dependencies.

Reviewer 3: It think this should say something more like "this plugin exports npm tarballs to a local directory"

The purpose of the plugin is to build npm projects and place the resulting tarball in a local directory for other npm parts to install from.

It can also build from local dependencies but only if it has the "self-contained" build attribute

> applications from local dependencies.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The :ref:`craft_parts_npm_use_plugin` is added. This plugin builds npm
apps from local dependencies.
```

Additionally, the :ref:`craft_parts_npm_plugin` plugin gained support for the
``self-contained`` build attribute, which enables parts using the ``npm-use`` plugin to
use local dependencies.

``maven-use`` plugin

> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Maven Use plugin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

Author: https://github.com/canonical/snapcraft/pull/6220/commits/39eb0b4c02a3d8bb58b0dccc4e02620c55ae9b34

The new :ref:`craft_parts_maven_use_plugin` has been added. This plugin builds Maven

> applications from local dependencies.

Reviewer 3: I defer to @bepri but I believe same goes for the maven-use plugin. It deploys artifacts to a local repository rather than build from local dependencies (which it does do if in self-contained mode)

Reviewer: I agree, the main use-case of these plugins is that they output to the backstage dir rather than the stage dir. I think it's more accurate to say that they _enable_ building applications from local dependencies since they give you the ability to do an incremental build.

> applications from local dependencies.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The :ref:`craft_parts_maven_use_plugin` is added. This plugin builds Maven
apps from local dependencies.
```

Author: https://github.com/canonical/snapcraft/pull/6220/commits/39eb0b4c02a3d8bb58b0dccc4e02620c55ae9b34

I applied the first suggestion and a rewording dropped "applications", so I didn't apply the second part of the suggestion.

Build on a compatible architecture
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Snapcraft can now build a snap inside a provider running a different but compatible

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Snapcraft can now build a snap inside a build provider running a different but compatible
```

Author: https://github.com/canonical/snapcraft/pull/6220/commits/39eb0b4c02a3d8bb58b0dccc4e02620c55ae9b34

> architecture. Set the ``CRAFT_BUILD_ON`` environment variable to the desired

Reviewer 2: Should we note that it's up to the build provider to make it right? Unfortunately, I can't find any compatibility charts for LXD and Multipass.

Author: What do you mean by "make it right"?  

@lengau, do you know if there are any differences between Multipass and LXD for this feature?

Reviewer 2: > What do you mean by "make it right"?

In the sense of which words you can pass to `CRAFT_BUILD_ON` and whether they work as expected.

Author: I clarified that it should be a Debian architecture, but I'll wait for Alex to chime in.

Reviewer 4: This actually only works with the LXD provider (the multipass provider gives an organically-grown, artisanal error message). It also only works if the provider allows it, which in practice comes down to whether the host kernel can provide the correct personality (seen by running `setarch --list`). We rely entirely on the provider to behave correctly here.

Reviewer 4: In practice right *now*, that means that you can use `CRAFT_BUILD_ON` to run in native armhf mode on an arm64 machine. (In theory we could do that with i686 on an amd64 machine, but in practice we don't have a snapd for it.)

Honestly, I think the best move is to simply not mention this 😬

Author: I'm fine with dropping it, especially since we don't have documentation to explain the nuances.

What's new
----------

Snapcraft 9.0 brings the following features, integrations, and improvements.

Support for core26
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Snapcraft now supports building snaps with the core26 base. Core26 is stable and
recommended for all new snaps.

If you're currently using core24, you can migrate by following the
:ref:`how-to-change-from-core24-to-core26` guide.

If you were already building experimental core26 snaps, you can drop
``build-base: devel`` or ``grade: devel`` from your project file. As a result, your
snaps will be eligible for publication to candidate and stable channels in the Snap
Store.

GPU extension
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Snaps support hardware-accelerated graphics like OpenGL and Vulkan, but accessing GPU
libraries usually requires a full desktop extension, increasing complexity and build
time.

A :ref:`reference-gpu-extension` has been added for core22 and higher snaps, which
provides hardware-accelerated graphics support for apps. If your snap used a desktop
extension like GNOME as a workaround for accessing GPU capabilities, replace it with
this new extension.

GPU linter
~~~~~~~~~~

A new linter has been added for snaps that need GPU libraries.

> If a snap stages GPU libraries via the :ref:`stage-packages <PartSpec.stage_packages>`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If a snap stages GPU libraries with the :ref:`stage-packages <PartSpec.stage_packages>`
```

One more nit to consider for the international readers among us. :)

Author: Ack, nice catch.

:ref:`Project.donation` key, as this key was generally rarely set and was silenced more
often than not.

Gradle plugin improvements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Gradle daemon is now disabled by default when using the
:ref:`craft_parts_gradle_plugin`. You can control this behavior with the new
``gradle-use-daemon`` key.

The Gradle plugin also gained support for the ``self-contained`` build attribute,
which enables parts using the :ref:`craft_parts_maven_use_plugin` to use local

> dependencies.

Reviewer 2: Nit:

```suggestion
The plugin now also supports for the ``self-contained`` build attribute,
so that parts with the :ref:`craft_parts_maven_use_plugin` can use local
dependencies.
```

Author: https://github.com/canonical/snapcraft/pull/6220/commits/39eb0b4c02a3d8bb58b0dccc4e02620c55ae9b34
